{\rtf0\ansi \deff0 {\fonttbl {\f0\froman Tms Rmn;}{\f1\fswiss Helv;}{\f2\fmodern Courier;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue127;\red0\green127\blue0;\red0\green127\blue127;\red127\green0\blue0;\red127\green0\blue127;\red127\green127\blue0;\red127\green127\blue127;\red63\green63\blue63;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red0\green255\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}\linex0 \sbknone 
\margl1440 \margr1296 \plain \gutter720 \margb1440 \margt1440 \margb6 \par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\pard \qc \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 M E M O R A N D U M\par 
\par 
\par 
\pard \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336   to:  Zebra mussel monitoring cooperators\par 
from:  Doug Blodgett\par 
date:  10 October 1991\par 
  re:  Zebra mussel samplers\par 
\par 
By the time you receive this memo, I anticipate the water temperature at your zebra mussel monitoring sites is or will soon be below 12\up6 o C -- i.e it's time to retrieve the samplers.  \par 
\plain \par 
We are sending via UPS the following supplies for sampler preservation and shipment:\par 
\par 
\tab  1 ammunition canister\par 
\tab  1 polyethylene container containing approx. 2 gal. of 5% buffered \tab    \tab    formalin/sugar solution\par 
\tab  1 cardboard box to support polyethylene container (some assembly \tab    \tab    required)\par 
\tab  1 spigot for polyethylene container\par 
\tab 45 ziplock bags\par 
\tab  2 heavy-duty garbage bags\par 
\par 
The ammunition canister will be used to ship the disassembled samplers back to Havana.  \par 
\par 
Please disassemble and preserve the samplers in the field.  First, inspect the samplers for zebra mussels and note any on a zebra mussel monitoring data sheet.  Try not to dislodge any of the material (periphyton, zebra mussels, etc.) that has attached to the plates.  As you disassemble a sampler, each plate will be placed in a doubled ziplock bag (one inside the other).  Each of the bags should be labeled with the station location code, the sampler identification (A or B, or whatever), the date, and the crewleader's name.  This information should be on both bags.  \par 
\par 
Take care when inserting the plates into the bags and during handling as the bags readily spring leaks in the lower corner seams.  It is better if you do not hold the bagged plate by the top of the bag -- support it from the bottom as much as possible.\par 
\par 
Once you have the plate bagged, add approximately 300 ml (about 1 1/2 to 2 inches) of the 5% buffered formalin/sugar solution to the inner bag.  Expel as much air from the bags as possible and seal.  Please devote extra effort to insuring both bags are completely sealed.  Next, gently rotate the bag so that all surfaces of the plate come in contact with the preservative.  The hardware from each sampler (3 spacers and 2 eye-bolts) should be double-bagged, labeled, and preserved as well.  \par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\i Zebra mussel monitoring cooperators\par 
10 October 1991\par 
Page 2\plain \par 
\par 
\par 
Line the ammo canister with a garbage bag and pack the plates and hardware inside.  Again, be as careful as practical to reduce the chances for leaks.  All 16 plates and 4 bags of hardware should fit into the one ammo canister.  Depending on how much space is left, you may need to add styrofoam peanuts or other packing material. It would be good if you could gently rotate the canister onto each side every day or two until shipment to insure that all surfaces stay wetted with formalin.  The canister should be shipped to the Havana Field Station.  Because of the formaldehyde, I suggest/request you ship it UPS.  \par 
\par 
We would also like for you to ship the 125 ml bottles containing the preserved microscope slides to the same address.  Again, shipping UPS is preferred.  \par 
Finally, I would like photocopies of your zebra mussel monitoring data sheets.\par 
\par 
The plastic container is yours to keep (big deal huh!).\par 
\par 
Again, your cooperation and assistance are greatly appreciated.\par 
\par 
If you have questions or need additional packaging supplies, give me a call at 309-543-6000.}