{\rtf0\ansi \deff0 {\fonttbl {\f0\froman Tms Rmn;}{\f1\fswiss Helv;}{\f2\fmodern Courier;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue127;\red0\green127\blue0;\red0\green127\blue127;\red127\green0\blue0;\red127\green0\blue127;\red127\green127\blue0;\red127\green127\blue127;\red63\green63\blue63;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red0\green255\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}\linex0 \sbknone 
\margl1440 \margr1296 \plain \gutter720 \margb1440 \margt1440 \margb6 \par 
\par 
\par 
\pard \sl480 \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 \tab K. Douglas Blodgett is an Associate Research Biologist for the Illinois Natural History Survey.  He has been with the Survey since 1982, and holds BS and MS degrees in biology from Western Illinois University.  He has been involved in research dealing with water and sediment quality, aquatic vegetation, invertebrates (especially freshwater mussels), and fish of the Illinois and Mississippi rivers.  \par 
\tab Presently, one of Doug's major responsibilities is serving as Team Leader for the Long Term Resource Monitoring Program's (LTRMP) field station on the Illinois River at Havana, IL.  The LTRMP currently monitors water quality, vegetation, and fisheries on six river reaches of the Upper Mississippi River System.  This past summer, Doug coordinated field monitoring for zebra mussels at the six LTRMP field stations -- a cooperative effort of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service Environmental Management Technical Center, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Waterways Experiment Station, and the Natural History Survey.\par 
\par 
\page \par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\pard \qc \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 Written Statement of \par 
\par 
\par 
\pard \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 K. Douglas Blodgett\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
Associate Research Biologist and Team Leader\par 
\par 
Illinois Natural History Survey and\par 
\par 
Long Term Resource Monitoring Program\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
Zebra Mussel Monitoring for the Upper Mississippi River System\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
Presented to\par 
\par 
the Honorable Richard J. Durbin\par 
\par 
Member, United States House of Representative\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
11 November 1991\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
Quincy,Illinois\par 
\par 
\page \par 
\pard \sl480 \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 \tab The rapid range expansion of the recently introduced zebra mussel (Dreissena polymorpha) forewarns of significant negative impacts on both the ecology and economy of the Upper Mississippi River System (UMRS) -- a resource the United States Congress has declared to be nationally significant both as an ecosystem and a commercial navigation corridor.  \par 
\tab My statements are made from a natural resources perspective. However, it is readily evident that a better understanding of the ecology of the zebra mussel will be beneficial in addressing needs of UMRS industries as well.\par 
\tab A coordinated zebra mussel monitoring program for the UMRS should provide much of the information needed to manage this introduced species.  The ideal monitoring program will do more than document the range and expansion of the species.  It is important that zebra mussel monitoring be designed and implemented as an integral part of a coordinated research effort to \ul understand\plain  the range and expansion of the species as well as its impacts on the ecology of the river system.  Knowledge gained from a comprehensive monitoring program would facilitate the design and implementation of the most effective, efficient, and environmentally sound management options to reduce negative ecological and economic impacts.\par 
\tab First, I will provide an overview summarizing some of the major questions that need to be answered by a zebra mussel monitoring program.  Then, I will present some considerations that should go into designing and implementing such a program.  Finally, I will describe a baseline monitoring effort we initiated this past summer as a cooperative effort of the Illinois Natural History Survey, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's Environmental Management Technical Center, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' Waterways Experiment Station, and the Long Term Resource Monitoring Program's six field stations on the Upper Mississippi and Illinois rivers.\par 
\tab From both economic and ecological perspectives, a zebra mussel monitoring program for the UMRS should directly answer the following questions:\par 
  I. Where are the zebra mussels?   (their distribution) \par 
 II. How are they doing?  (densities, growth, reproduction)\par 
III. What are their impacts, both on abiotic (e.g., water          \tab quality) and biotic (e.g., macroinvertebrates, fish, etc.)                          \tab factors?\par 
Answers to these questions, when used in conjunction with other research and experiences with zebra mussels on the Great Lakes and in Europe would answer other important questions such as:            What factors limit zebra mussel distributions and        \tab densities?\par 
     Where will they be? (predicted distribution)\par 
     How will they do?\par 
     What will their impacts be on both abiotic and biotic             \tab factors?\par 
Again, the answers to these questions are fundamental to the design and implementation of the most effective and efficient management of zebra mussels in midwestern rivers, so the costs to industries and the environment will be minimized.\par 
\tab Europeans have existed with and studied zebra mussel for over two hundred years and research is being conducted on zebra mussels in the Great Lakes.  However, not all the information from Europe and the Great Lakes is applicable to the Upper Mississippi River ecosystem: the UMRS is different in many ways.  \tab In general, pollution levels are lower in the UMRS than in European rivers; zebra mussels have been inhibited to a degree by poorer water quality in Europe, and we anticipate they will do better and thus be more of a problem in the United States.  \par 
\tab There are major differences between the Great Lakes and UMRS ecosystems.  For example, in the Great Lakes, phytoplankton communities form the base of food chains, whereas in the UMRS, organic detritus is a more important energy source.  Other differences include water volume and currents, water quality (including sediment and organic loads), substrate, etc.  Not only will the impacts of zebra mussels on the river system be different than those on the Great Lakes and European rivers, so, too, will be the impacts of the UMRS on the zebra mussels.\par 
\tab Returning to the list of questions that a zebra mussel monitoring program should answer, a brief explanation of each follows.\par 
I. Where are they?  (zebra mussel distribution)\par 
\tab Accurate, timely data on zebra mussel distribution are essential to develop  effective and efficient management strategies, from both preventive and remedial viewpoints.  For example, it is not economically efficient to activate expensive management strategies when and/or where there are no zebra mussels.  \par 
\tab With zebra mussels expanding their range so rapidly, how can we keep up with them?  The most effective early detection system for zebra mussels is a well-informed public.  Historically, monitoring programs set up by various agencies and industries on the Great Lakes to detect zebra mussels, rarely provided the first evidence of range extensions into new areas; typically, new encroachments were discovered accidentally.  We have had similar experiences on the Illinois River: shellers harvesting native mussel shells for the cultured pearl industry collected five of the first six specimens reported, and a boy fishing collected the other one.  \par 
\tab To best document the expansion of the zebra mussel, A coordinated effort to educate the public about the impending invasion should be undertaken.  Information materials (pamphlets, photographs, etc.) and scientific expertise should be made available to the media and public.  These efforts should target river users, especially shellers and shell buyers involved in harvesting native mussel shells for the cultured pearl industry.  In 1990, over 7.5 million pounds of shells were harvested from the UMRS.  Because of the sheer volume of substrate they "sample," cooperation from shellers may prove to be valuable for monitoring the expanding distribution of zebra mussels in the UMRS.  \par 
\tab A coordinated network for reporting and verifying zebra mussel range expansions on the UMRS should be developed.  The Sea Grant Programs have taken the lead developing such a network on the Great Lakes; they may be the appropriate agencies for the UMRS as well.  If not, the lead agency could certainly benefit from their experiences.  \par 
\tab The reporting procedure should be as simple as possible.  For example, an interstate, toll-free telephone number could be set up for people to call in sightings from throughout the UMRS. Data on location, date found, etc. could be recorded, along with the finder's name, address, and telephone number.  This information then could be relayed to the appropriate natural resources agency for use in obtaining additional information.  That agency should make arrangements for a positive identification and to have a voucher specimen archived in an accredited collection.  The importance of proper reporting and the steps to follow should be thoroughly explained during the education process.  A handout similar to the Zebra Mussel WATCH cards from the Great Lakes Sea Grant Network should be designed and distributed.\par 
II. How are they doing? (densities, growth, reproduction, etc.)\par 
\tab Once the zebra mussels are invading an area, a standardized monitoring program should be in place to provide data on densities, growth rates, reproductive rates, etc.  Minimally, the program should monitor for adults and settled larvae.  A number of relatively inexpensive samplers have been developed.  They are easy to use and require little time or training to deploy and maintain.  It would be worthwhile to adopt one single type of sampler as the standard to use throughout the UMRS.\par 
\tab Monitoring for the zebra mussel larvae (veligers) would provide valuable information about when the larvae are in the water column and their numbers.  Besides being important for understanding the life history of zebra mussels in midwestern rivers, these data would provide utilities and industries with guidance for implementing preventive measures to keep the zebra mussels from becoming established in their facilities.  For example, chlorinating water only when larvae are present in the water column will be more economical than continuous chlorination.  Monitoring for larvae will be more expensive because of the need for additional equipment, personnel, and training/expertise.  Much of the information gained by monitoring for larvae could be inferred from the relative amounts of juvenile mussel settlement be taking place a few weeks later.  However, a two- to three-week delay may be unacceptable for facilities trying to protect water systems from infestations. \par 
III. What are their impacts - both on abiotic (e.g., water          \tab quality) and biotic (e.g., macroinvertebrates, fish,          \tab etc.) factors?\par 
\tab Determining the environmental impacts of zebra mussels on the river system requires knowledge of pre-invasion conditions and continued monitoring during and after the zebra mussel invasion.  Additional parameters that should be part of the monitoring program are provided in Table 1.\par 
\tab While several primary impacts are possible, disruption of food webs based on organic matter in the water column may be most drastic ecologically.  If zebra mussel populations in our inland river systems reach densities as high as 40 thousand individuals per square meter and filter one liter of water daily (as in the Great Lakes) they may significantly reduce the quantity of organic matter in the water column.  Filter feeders and other organisms which utilize this energy source may be outcompeted by the zebra mussels.  These impacts may be felt throughout the complex detritus-based food webs, possibly resulting in a decline of top- level consumers, such as many species of sport fish and waterfowl.  Determining and understanding such impacts will require monitoring of water quality, vegetation, phytoplankton and zooplankton, macroinvertebrates, fish, mammals and waterfowl.   \par 
\tab Unfortunately, we do not have all the baseline data necessary for future analysis to comprehend impacts of the zebra mussels on the UMRS.  For example, the dynamics (both temporal and spatial) of organic matter in our large floodplain river ecosystems are not well documented or understood.  Therefore, it may be difficult to determine whether or not a perceived change in organic matter quantity and/or quality in the water column is part of a "natural cycle" or results from filter feeding activities of the zebra mussels.  \par 
\par 
\pard \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 Table 1.  Additional parameters that should in the zebra mussel           monitoring program.\par 
\par 
Water Quality \par 
     depth                             ammonia          \par 
     temperature                       nitrates/nitrites             \par 
     water velocity                    calcium                       \par 
     dissolved oxygen                  chlorophyll                   \par 
     pH                                organic carbon   \par 
     total suspended solids                     \par 
     specific conductance\par 
     turbidity/transparency                                         \par 
                                             \par 
Biotic Populations\par 
     phytoplankton and zooplankton \par 
     macroinvertebrates - especially mussels    \par 
     fish                                 \par 
     vegetation\par 
     mammals\par 
     waterfowl\par 
\par 
\pard \sl480 \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 Some considerations for designing and implementing a zebra mussel monitoring program\par 
\tab The scope of a program to monitor zebra mussels and their impacts on large floodplain river systems of the Midwest may be defined by available personnel and funds.  The additional coverage necessary to monitor the distribution of zebra mussels should be provided by utilizing an informed public.  Additional, more intensive monitoring efforts to determine the conditions of zebra mussel populations (densities, reproduction, etc.) and to evaluate impacts should be geographically distributed to cover the different environments of the UMRS, with a minimum of three to four areas of intensive efforts (primary sites) on the Upper Mississippi River and two on the Illinois River.  At these primary sites, data on adults, settled larvae and juveniles, and larvae in the water column should be collected weekly from spring through fall.  In addition to monitoring zebra mussels, data on water quality, zooplankton and phytoplankton, macroinvertebrates, fish, and vegetation should be collected (see Table 1).\par 
\tab The same agencies or individuals responsible for the primary monitoring sites should initiate and coordinate the sampling of several secondary sites, monitoring specifically for adults and settled larvae only.  The secondary sites should be interspersed with the primary sites and, once established, could be maintained by cooperating industries or volunteers.  Additional relevant data may be available for these secondary sites at little or no expense: for example, many industries perform a suite of analyses on the raw river water they use.\par 
\tab Methods and equipment used to monitor zebra mussel populations and their impacts should be standardized to facilitate valid comparisons.  A document such as Dr. Ellen Marsden's "Standard Protocols for Monitoring and Sampling Zebra Mussels" would provide a starting point.  It is also important that replicate samples be taken to provide for an assessment of variability.  \par 
\tab The data sets generated by the described monitoring program will be essential to documenting and understanding the impacts of zebra mussels on the ecology of the UMRS.  These data sets should be used to help create zebra mussel population models to aid in predicting future distributions and impacts, as well as providing clues for designing and implementing management strategies.\par 
\par 
LTRMP Zebra Mussel Monitoring\par 
\tab During this past summer, an existing program, the Long Term Resource Monitoring Program (LTRMP), was used to initiate baseline zebra mussel monitoring in eight reaches of the UMRS.  This zebra mussel monitoring was a cooperative effort of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's Environmental Management Technical Center, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' Waterways Experiment Station, the Illinois Natural History Survey, and the six LTRMP field stations (Figure 1).  The LTRMP field stations are responsible for monitoring water quality, vegetation, and fisheries on their particular river reaches.  With the exceptions of plankton, macroinvertebrates, mammals, and waterfowl, all the suggested additional parameters (Table 1) are currently monitored weekly or bimonthly along six separate river reaches of the UMRS by the LTRMP field stations.  \tab Our baseline zebra mussel effort consisted of monitoring for adults and settled juveniles at each station.  Limited sampling for larvae in the water column was done at the Havana Field Station.  Duplicate plate samplers (Figure 2), were deployed at two of the established LTRMP water quality monitoring sites near each field station and at two additional sites on the Illinois River (Figure 3).  Samplers near the field stations were inspected weekly by LTRMP water quality crews during their routine work; those at the two additional sites on the Illinois were maintained by two private industries that use river water. \par 
\tab While we are still in the process of evaluating our efforts, I think our baseline program was successful.  The public awareness generated by our efforts resulted in our receiving reports and specimens of the first six zebra mussels collected in the Illinois River.  Juvenile zebra mussels were collected on our samplers maintained by LTV Steel at Hennepin, IL.  The samplers have been collected and preserved for further inspection in the laboratory to document possible occurrences of settled larvae and to examine periphyton communities that developed on the samplers.  \tab Any zebra mussel monitoring program that is developed should take full advantage of the existing data collection efforts being undertaken on the UMRS.  This approach will reduce duplication of effort and should provide for the most efficient use of available funds, equipment, personnel, and expertise.\par 
\tab In conclusion, I will reiterate that a zebra mussel monitoring program should provide much of the information needed to manage this introduced species.  This program should not be limited to documenting zebra mussel distributions, but should be designed and implemented as an integral part of a coordinated research effort to \ul understand\plain  the range and expansion of the species as well as the impacts of zebra mussels on the ecology of the UMRS.  The data sets generated by the ideal monitoring program will be critical to understanding zebra mussels and their impacts.  This information can then be used to design and implement the most effective, efficient, and environmentally sound management programs to reduce negative ecological and economical impacts of zebra mussels.\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
The first confirmed collection of a zebra mussel from the UMRS occurred on 18 June 1991 in a side channel of the Illinois River near Bath, IL, approximately 217 river miles (350 km) downstream from Lake Michigan and 110 river miles (177 km) upstream from the confluence of the Illinois and Mississippi rivers.  The adult specimen was attached to a native threeridge mussel (Amblema plicata) and was taken by a commercial sheller harvesting freshwater mussels for use in the cultured pearl industry.  Since then, adults and/or juveniles have been collected from at least seven other sites on the Illinois River.  In September, zebra mussels were reported from the Mississippi River as far upstream as Pool 8 near La Crosse, WI, and as far downstream as the Melvin Price Locks and Dam at Alton, IL.}