{\rtf0\ansi \deff0 {\fonttbl {\f0\froman Tms Rmn;}{\f1\fswiss Helv;}{\f2\fmodern Courier;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue127;\red0\green127\blue0;\red0\green127\blue127;\red127\green0\blue0;\red127\green0\blue127;\red127\green127\blue0;\red127\green127\blue127;\red63\green63\blue63;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red0\green255\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}\linex0 \sbknone 
\margl1440 \margr1296 \plain \gutter720 \margb1440 \margt1440 \margb6 \par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\pard \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336                                                                6 January 1992\par 
\par 
\par 
John Epifanio\par 
Illinois Natural History Survey\par 
607 East Peabody Drive\par 
Champaign, IL 61820\par 
\par 
\par 
Dear John:\par 
\par 
As I requested during our telephone conversation last week, we would like you to be the luncheon speaker at the zebra mussel workshop on Monday, 27 January 1992.  The workshop is being sponsored by Illinois Power Company, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and the Survey, and it will run from 9:00 am through 4:30 pm at Illinois Power's Visitor Center at Clinton Lake.  The major objective of the workshop is to provide Illinois River water users information about the impending spread, impacts, and control options for zebra mussels.  \par 
We would like for you to spend 20-25 minutes during/after lunch talking about the Nonindigenous Aquatic Nuisance Prevention and Control Act -- what it is, what it should do for Illinois and more specifically industries along the Illinois River.  As we agreed, I think a talk without visual aids is appropriate, but if you change your mind, let me know.  There will be video, slide, and overhead capabilities in the auditorium, but I'm not sure what can be made available in the room where we are eating.\par 
\par 
We sent out advance fliers a few weeks ago, and from the response we got, we anticipate 40-60 attendees.  I am enclosing a copy of the registration form that we are sending out today (for your information).  Don't worry about returning the form -- consider yourself registered.  \par 
\par 
Let me know if you need additional information.\par 
\par 
Thank you in advance for your participation.  \par 
\par 
\par 
Sincerely,\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
Doug Blodgett\par 
\par 
cc: John Burke (Illinois Power)\par 
\par 
Enclosure}