{\rtf0\ansi \deff0 {\fonttbl {\f0\froman Tms Rmn;}{\f1\fswiss Helv;}{\f2\fmodern Courier;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue127;\red0\green127\blue0;\red0\green127\blue127;\red127\green0\blue0;\red127\green0\blue127;\red127\green127\blue0;\red127\green127\blue127;\red63\green63\blue63;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red0\green255\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}\linex0 \sbknone 
\margl1440 \margr1296 \plain \gutter720 \margb1440 \margt1440 \margb6 \par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\pard \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 16 December 1991\par 
\par 
\par 
Jim Flannery\par 
LTV Steel Company\par 
Environmental Control Department\par 
3001 Dickey Road\par 
East Chicago, IN 46312-1610\par 
\par 
Dear Mr. Flannery:\par 
\par 
This letter requests your participation as a presenter in a workshop to provide information about zebra mussels to industries and municipalities along the Illinois River.  The workshop is being cosponsored by the Illinois Power Company, the Environmental Management Technical Center of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and the Illinois Natural History Survey.  It is planned for Monday, 27 January 1992, at Illinois Power's Clinton Lake Visitor Center near Clinton, IL.  The Clinton Lake facility is approximately 30 miles south of Bloomington/Normal.  I am enclosing the workshop announcement we sent out in late November, and in a few weeks I will send additional information with specific times, a tentative agenda, a map, etc.  \par 
\par 
We have invited industries and municipalities who use water from the Illinois River including LTV Steel from Hennepin.  My experience indicates many of these river water users want additional information about zebra mussels.  This workshop is intended to provide basic facts about zebra mussels, their potential impacts, and management options.  Perhaps as important, it will provide attendees opportunities to establish contacts to help them better address problems in the future.  We are confident an overview of the zebra mussel problems and control strategies at your LTV facility will be beneficial to the attendees, and we hope you would gain useful information from the other presenters as well.  Presentations will be scheduled to last approximately 30 minutes with an additional 5-10 minutes for questions and/or discussion.  \par 
\par 
This workshop is being organized as a service to these industries and municipalities along the river.  While a modest fee will be collected to help defray workshop expenses such as lunch, we will not be able to compensate speakers, although we will try to reimburse speakers for travel expenses if necessary.  Let me know of any needs you will have along these lines.\par 
\par 
Please let me know if you will be able to participate, and thank you in advance.\par 
\par 
\par 
Sincerely yours,\par 
\par 
\par 
K. Douglas Blodgett\par 
Associate Research Biologist\par 
\par 
\par 
Enclosure\par 
\par 
\par 
cc: John Burke, Illinois Power}