{\rtf0\ansi \deff0 {\fonttbl {\f0\froman Tms Rmn;}{\f1\fswiss Helv;}{\f2\fmodern Courier;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue127;\red0\green127\blue0;\red0\green127\blue127;\red127\green0\blue0;\red127\green0\blue127;\red127\green127\blue0;\red127\green127\blue127;\red63\green63\blue63;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red0\green255\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}\linex0 \sbknone 
\margl1440 \margr1296 \plain \gutter720 \margb1440 \margt1440 \margb6 \pard \li144 \sl360 \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336   \par 
\pard \sl360 \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336   \par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
16 December 1991\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
J.Ellen Marsden\par 
Lake Michigan Biological Station\par 
P.O. Box 634\par 
Zion, IL 60099\par 
\par 
Dear Ellen:\par 
\par 
This letter is to confirm my request for your participation as a presenter in a zebra mussel workshop for industries and municipalities along the Illinois River.  We would like for you to talk about basic zebra mussel biology and monitoring as they apply to river water users.  \par 
The workshop will be one day and is planned for Monday, 27 January 1992, at Illinois Power's Clinton Lake Visitor Center near Clinton, IL.  The Clinton Lake facility is approximately 30 miles south of Bloomington/Normal.  The workshop is being co-sponsored by the Illinois Power Company, the Environmental Management Technical Center of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, and the Illinois Natural History Survey.   In a few weeks I will send additional information with specific times, a tentative agenda, a map, etc.  As I indicated previously, I will reimburse you for your overnight accommodations, meals, etc.  After the workshop, please submit a completed U of I travel voucher and we will add our account and forward to the CAE.  \par 
\par 
We are targeting the workshop for industries and municipalities who use water from the river.  My experience indicates many of these river water users need additional information about zebra mussels.  This workshop is intended to provide basic facts about zebra mussels, their potential impacts, and management options.  It will rely heavily on the experiences from the Great Lakes: other tentative speakers include Jim Flannery (LTV Steel), Wil LePage (Monroe Water Treatment Plant), and Bill Kovalak (Detroit Edison).  Also, the workshop will provide attendees opportunities to establish contacts to help them better address zebra mussel problems in the future.\par 
\par 
We hope to keep the workshop relatively informal.  I have tentatively scheduled 30 minutes for your presentation with an additional 5-10 minutes for questions and discussion.  However, we are still flexible, and if you think you would like additional (or less) time, let me know.  Both slide and overhead projectors will be available.  Also, could you use video display capabilities?  As we discussed, I think it would be great if we could have some dissecting scopes and/or microscopes set up with larvae and/or juveniles.  What would you be willing to supply along those lines and what else could we provide?\par 
\par 
\par 
\i \pard \qc \sl360 \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 page 2           Blodgett letter to J.E. Marsden         16 December 1991\plain \par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\pard \sl360 \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 Thank you in advance for your assistance and participation.\par 
\par 
Also, I am returning your zebra mussel article for "Aquaticus" with a few comments for your consideration.  Most of my suggestions are more matters of style.  I sincerely appreciate your offer of coauthorship, but I really can't see that my contributions warrant it.  Therefore I think you could delete my name from the author list.  Let me know if you have questions.  \par 
\par 
Hope you and yours have a safe and happy holiday season!\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
Sincerely yours,\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
K. Douglas Blodgett\par 
Associate Research Biologist}