{\rtf0\ansi \deff0 {\fonttbl {\f0\froman Tms Rmn;}{\f1\fswiss Helv;}{\f2\fmodern Courier;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue127;\red0\green127\blue0;\red0\green127\blue127;\red127\green0\blue0;\red127\green0\blue127;\red127\green127\blue0;\red127\green127\blue127;\red63\green63\blue63;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red0\green255\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}\linex0 \sbknone 
\margl1440 \margr1296 \plain \gutter720 \margb1440 \margt1440 \margb6 \par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\pard \qc \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 M E M O R A N D U M\par 
\pard \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336  \par 
\par 
  to: Dave Philipp\par 
\par 
from: Doug Blodgett\par 
\par 
date: 12 November 1991\par 
\par 
  re: Zebra mussel involvement\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
The following list documents what I'm doing to develop our (Survey and LTRMP) reputation for zebra mussel work on the Upper Mississippi River System.\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
Co-authored paper by Dr. Cliff Kraft (Wisconsin Sea Grant), Electric Utility Zebra Mussel Control Technology Conference, sponsored by Electric Power Research Institute, 22-23 October 1991, Itasca, IL.\par 
\par 
Provided oral and written statements, U.S. Congressman Durbin's public hearing on zebra mussels, 11 November 1991, Quincy, IL. \par 
\par 
Will present paper (co-authored by Thiel, Miller, and Sparks), Second International Zebra Mussel Research Conference, 19-22 November 1991, Rochester, NY.\par 
\par 
Submitted paper abstract (co-authored by Sparks, Thiel, and Miller), State AFS meeting, 12-14 February 1992, Waukegan, IL.\par 
\par 
Submitted paper abstract (co-authored by Sparks), Illinois Chapter of the Water Pollution Control Federation meeting, March 1992, Chicago?, IL.\par 
\par 
Will co-author poster (w/ Thiel and Miller?), Second International Zebra Mussel Conference, 19-21 February 1992, Toronto, Ontario.  Right now, I'm not planning to attend.\par 
\par 
Will submit abstract for paper (and possibly co-author poster), Mississippi River Research Consortium Meeting, 30 April-1 May 1991, LaCrosse, WI. \par 
}