{\rtf0\ansi \deff0 {\fonttbl {\f0\froman Tms Rmn;}{\f1\fswiss Helv;}{\f2\fmodern Courier;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue127;\red0\green127\blue0;\red0\green127\blue127;\red127\green0\blue0;\red127\green0\blue127;\red127\green127\blue0;\red127\green127\blue127;\red63\green63\blue63;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red0\green255\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}\linex0 \sbknone 
\margl1440 \margr1296 \plain \gutter720 \margb1440 \margt1440 \margb6 \par 
\par 
\par 
\pard \li6480 \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 December 17, 1991\par 
\par 
\pard \li144 \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 Dr. Daniel Soluk\par 
\pard \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 Center for Aquatic Ecology\par 
Illinois Natural History Survey\par 
Natural Resources Building\par 
607 East Peabody\par 
Champaign, IL  61820\par 
\par 
Dear Dan,\par 
\par 
I want to confirm some of the points we made at the meeting on 10 December in Champaign.  First, we have salary money and operating expenses for you through 31 December 1993.  The Long-Term Resource Monitoring Program probably will provide only enough money to cover the salaries, benefits, and overhead for you and Deb Corti through 30 September 1992 (see enclosed letter from John Barko of the EMTC).  The balance of your support comes from overhead money that the Chief is returning to the project (thanks to Dave Philipp's negotiations) and from money that we are squeezing from other grants, mostly from the LTRM programs at La Grange Pool on the Illinois and Pool 26 on the Mississippi, with a few thousand for the boat and equipment from a state grant.\par 
\par 
Because the Survey is contributing so much to this project, we want to document that contribution, to demonstrate to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service that they are getting a lot for their money.  This means that you should keep track of state time furnished to the project (e.g., Larry Gross and other Survey staff in the shop).  Larry can probably give you a rough estimate.  We then need to convert time to dollars, based on wages and benefits.  We will also count the overhead forgone as a result of not charging full project expenses to the contract.\par 
\par 
It is important that a methods paper be prepared as soon as you can demonstrate that the sampler works.  As soon as a rough draft is ready, we will send a copy to Dr. John Barko, the Research Director of the Environmental Management Technical Center in Onalaska, Wisconsin, to demonstrate that publishable products are being generated rapidly on this project, despite the limited support they are providing.  We might yet persuade them to provide some additional support in 1992 or 1993.\par 
\par 
You need to develop a budget for the $13,000 that has been made available in the Main Channel Invert account as a result of your salary and Deb's being paid from the La Grange LTRM account for the past few months.  You should include line items for supplies, travel, equipment (check with Bev, Deanne, or Cindy Dillman to see whether these are just non-expendable items costing over $500, e.g., an electric winch for the sampler), contractual services (includes things like outboard repair, shop time that you have to pay for, and computer software), and miscellaneous (to cover anything we haven't thought of, such as technical drafting expenses, shipping costs for samples or supplies, etc.).  We will plan on using U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service franked envelopes or mailing labels, so there should be no postage charges, at least during the year that the project is supported by USFWS.  Doug can send you these, if he hasn't already.  Just be sure to use them only for mailings that are clearly associated with the federally-supported project.  Also, the boat will be purchased from a separate Sediment Toxicity Project, so it will not come out of the $13,000.  Doug and I can help you with the budget, but you are the best judge of what your needs are.  You should send us a copy of your draft budget for suggestions.  The revised budget should be submitted on the appropriate Survey and University forms through the Center and Survey offices.  Until the University Grants and Contracts Office receives such an amendment, they probably will not allow any charges other than salaries and benefits.\par 
\par 
Doug requested that a separate account be set up, in his letter of 6 Dec., and you could check with Cindy Dillman to see if the account number is available yet.  This is the one that you or Steve Kohler will have signatory authority for and that you are amending to cover your operating expenses.  It should run from 1 October 1991 to 30 September 1992 and total $55,189.  This includes 20% overhead that the University takes out, so actual spending money is only $45,991.\par 
\par 
I have enclosed a letter I received from John Barko, which indicates that EMTC is unlikely to support this project after 30 September 1992.  I am not counting on convincing them otherwise, but we will make several tries, and I will send you a copy of my reply.  \par 
\par 
\par 
\tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab Sincerely yours,\par 
\par 
\par 
\tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab Richard E. Sparks\par 
\par 
cc:\tab Dave Philipp\par 
\tab Doug Blodgett\par 
\tab Chuck Theiling}