{\rtf0\ansi \deff0 {\fonttbl {\f0\froman Tms Rmn;}{\f1\fswiss Helv;}{\f2\fmodern Courier;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue127;\red0\green127\blue0;\red0\green127\blue127;\red127\green0\blue0;\red127\green0\blue127;\red127\green127\blue0;\red127\green127\blue127;\red63\green63\blue63;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red0\green255\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}\linex0 \sbknone 
\margl1440 \margr1296 \plain \gutter720 \margb1440 \margt1440 \margb6 \par 
\par 
\pard \qc \sl480 \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 {\field {\*\fldinst page }{\fldrslt 1}}Introduction \tab The recent invasion and rapid proliferation of zebra mussels through the Great Lakes forewarns of significant negative impacts on both the ecology and economy of the Upper Mississippi River System (UMRS) -- a resource the United States Congress declared to be nationally significant both as an ecosystem and as a commercial navigation corridor.  The UMRS is defined as the commercially navigable portions of the Mississippi River and its tributaries (including the Illinois River) above the confluence of the Mississippi and Ohio rivers in southern Illinois.  This statement focuses on the zebra mussel in the UMRS, but research and monitoring needs may be similar for other river systems.  My statements are made from a natural resources perspective.  However, it is readily evident that a better understanding of the ecology of zebra mussels will be beneficial in addressing needs of UMRS industries as well.  \par 
\pard \sl480 \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 \tab Zebra mussels (\i Dreissena polymorpha\plain ) are native to the Caspian region of western Russia.  Between 1700 and 1830 they extended their range throughout much of the Europe.  Zebra mussels were probably introduced into the Great Lakes in 1985 or 1986 when ballast water containing zebra mussel larvae was discharged from one or more transoceanic ships into Lake St. Clair.  Since then, the effective invaders have spread through the Great Lakes and into inland river systems including the UMRS. \tab Zebra mussels are filter-feeding bivalves which live three to six years and may attain a length of 1.5 to 2 inches (38 to 50 mm).  They are prolific: a female can produce thirty to forty thousand eggs per year. Eggs and sperm are released into the water column where fertilization takes place.  Fertilized eggs hatch within hours producing microscopic larvae, called veligers, which float in the water column for up to four weeks; to survive they must settle onto a firm substrate during that period.  Those larvae that find suitable conditions use a tuft of fibers, called a byssus or byssal threads, to attach to the substrate, and then they transform from the larval stage into juveniles; juveniles resemble adults but are smaller.  If environmental conditions are good, juveniles grow eight-thousandths of an inch (0.2 mm) per day during the growing season.  Within one year they can attain a length of one inch (25.4 mm) and become sexually mature.  \par 
\tab Natural range expansion generally occurs when free-floating forms (eggs or larvae) or dislodged zebra mussels (larvae, juveniles, or adults) are carried by water currents; such movements are downstream in river systems.  Human-mediated dispersal may occur if zebra mussels are transported on boat hulls and trailers (adults may survive for over one week out of the water), or in bilgewater and bait buckets.  These artificial movements may be downstream, upstream, or, unfortunately, even from one water body to another.  \par 
\tab Given their prolific reproductive capacity and their highly effective dispersal capabilities, both natural and human influenced, zebra mussel populations will become established in most water bodies where acceptable environmental conditions exist.  However, their advancement may be slowed, especially into landlocked lakes, reservoirs, and ponds, by minimizing human-mediated transport.  As zebra mussels become permanent constituents of our aquatic systems, we will need to focus on understanding the interrelationships between this exotic species and its environment and on minimizing negative impacts, both environmental and economic.\par 
\par 
\par 
\pard \qc \sl480 \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 Research \tab A major research effort should focus on the design and implementation of the most effective, efficient, and environmentally sound management program to reduce negative ecological and economic impacts of zebra mussels.  Studies investigating the biology of zebra mussels in the UMRS and their interactions with the environment may provide potential management options to reduce zebra mussel populations, reproduction, growth, and dispersal.  The range of additional relevant research topics is broad, from investigating the extremely high genetic variability and morphological plasticity of zebra mussels to evaluating secondary environmental impacts of control measures. \par 
\pard \sl480 \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 \tab Europeans have existed with and studied zebra mussels for over two hundred years, and aggressive research projects are underway in the Great Lakes and elsewhere.  However, not all that  information will be applicable to the UMRS ecosystem: the UMRS is different in many ways.  In general, pollution levels are lower in the UMRS than in European rivers; zebra mussels have been inhibited to a degree by poorer water quality in Europe, but they will probably do better and thus be more of a problem in the United States.  \par 
\tab There are major differences between the Great Lakes and UMRS ecosystems.  For example, in the Great Lakes, phytoplankton communities form the base of food chains, whereas in the UMRS, organic detritus is a more important energy source.  Other differences include water volume and currents, water quality (including sediment and organic loads), substrate, etc.  Not only will the impacts of zebra mussels on the river system be different from those on the Great Lakes and European rivers; so, too, will be the impacts of the UMRS on the zebra mussels.\par 
\tab A zebra mussel monitoring program will be an important research and management tool.  The ideal monitoring program will do more than document the range and expansion of the species.  It should provide much of the knowledge needed to 1) understand zebra mussels and their abiotic and biotic interactions in the UMRS, and 2) facilitate the design and implementation of effective, efficient, and environmentally sound management programs to reduce negative ecological and economic impacts of zebra mussels.\par 
\tab From both economic and ecological perspectives, a zebra mussel monitoring program for the UMRS should directly address the following:\par 
\tab I. Zebra mussel distributions (where are they?)\par 
\tab II. Zebra mussel densities, growth, reproduction (how are \par 
\tab \tab they doing?)\par 
\tab III. Zebra mussel impacts, both on abiotic (e.g., water \tab \tab quality) and biotic (e.g., macroinvertebrates, fish, \par 
\tab \tab etc.) factors.\par 
This information, when used in conjunction with other research and experiences with zebra mussels on the Great Lakes and in Europe, will allow us to determine what factors limit zebra mussel distributions and densities, and to predict future distributions (where they will be); densities, growth, and reproduction (how they will do), and impacts.  Again, this information is fundamental to establishing the most effective and efficient management of zebra mussels in midwestern rivers so costs to industries and the environment will be minimized.\par 
\par 
I. Zebra mussel distributions (where are they?)\par 
\tab Accurate, timely data on zebra mussel distribution are essential to develop effective and efficient management strategies, from both preventive and remedial viewpoints.  For example, it is not economically efficient to activate expensive management strategies when and/or where there are no zebra mussels.  \par 
\tab With zebra mussels expanding their range so rapidly, how can we keep up with them?  The most effective early detection system for zebra mussels is a well-informed public.  Historically, monitoring programs set up by various agencies and industries on the Great Lakes to detect zebra mussels rarely provided the first evidence of range extensions into new areas; typically, new encroachments were discovered accidentally.  We have had similar experiences on the Illinois River: shellers harvesting native mussel shells for the cultured pearl industry collected five of the first six specimens reported, and a boy fishing collected the other one.  \par 
\tab To document the expansion of the zebra mussel, a coordinated effort to educate the public about the impending invasion should be undertaken.  These efforts should be implemented on a local scale, perhaps by those involved with actual monitoring efforts, to increase cooperation and communication.  Information materials (pamphlets, photographs, etc.) and scientific expertise should be made available to the media and public.  Education efforts should target river users, especially shellers and shell buyers involved in harvesting native mussel shells for the cultured pearl industry.  In 1990 over 7.5 million pounds of shells were harvested from the UMRS.  Because of the sheer volume of substrate shellers "sample," their cooperation will be valuable for monitoring the expanding distribution of zebra mussels in the UMRS.  \par 
\tab A coordinated network for reporting and verifying zebra mussel range expansions on the UMRS should be developed.  The Sea Grant Programs have taken the lead developing such a network on the Great Lakes; they may be the appropriate agencies for the UMRS as well.  If not, the lead agency could certainly benefit from their experiences.  Again, participation by local agencies or monitoring stations will facilitate communication and cooperation.\par 
\tab The reporting procedure should be as simple as possible.  For example, an interstate, toll-free telephone number could be set up for people to call in sightings from throughout the UMRS. Data on location, date found, etc. could be recorded, along with the finder's name, address, and telephone number.  This information could be relayed to the local monitoring station/agency for use in obtaining additional information.  The monitoring station should make arrangements for a positive identification and for a voucher specimen to be archived in an accredited collection.  The importance of proper reporting and the steps to follow should be thoroughly explained during the education process.  A handout similar to the Zebra Mussel WATCH cards from the Great Lakes Sea Grant Network should be designed and distributed.\par 
\par 
II. Zebra mussel densities, growth, reproduction, etc. (how are they doing?)\par 
\tab Once the zebra mussels are invading an area, a standardized monitoring program should be in place to provide data on densities, growth rates, reproductive rates, etc.  Minimally, the program should monitor for adults and settled larvae.  A number of relatively inexpensive samplers have been developed.  They are easy to use and require little time or training to deploy and maintain.  It would be worthwhile to adopt one single type of sampler as the standard to use throughout the UMRS.\par 
\tab Monitoring for the zebra mussel larvae (veligers) would provide valuable information about when the larvae are in the water column and their numbers.  Besides being important for understanding the life history of zebra mussels in midwestern rivers, these data would provide utilities and industries with guidance for implementing preventive measures to keep the zebra mussels from becoming established in their facilities.  For example, chlorinating water only when larvae are present in the water column will be more economical than continuous chlorination.  Monitoring for larvae will be more expensive because of the need for additional equipment, personnel, and training/expertise.  Much of the information gained by monitoring for larvae could be inferred from the numbers of settled juvenile mussels present a few weeks later.  However, a two- to three-week delay may be unacceptable for facilities trying to protect water systems from infestations. \par 
\par 
III. Zebra mussel impacts - both on abiotic (e.g., water quality) and biotic (e.g., macroinvertebrates, fish, etc.) factors?\par 
\tab Determining the environmental impacts of zebra mussels on the UMRS requires knowledge of pre-invasion conditions and continued monitoring during and after the zebra mussel invasion.  Additional parameters that should be part of the monitoring program are provided in Table 1.\par 
\tab While several primary impacts are possible, disruption of food webs based on organic matter in the water column may be most drastic ecologically.  If zebra mussel populations in the UMRS reach densities as high as forty thousand individuals per square meter and filter one liter of water daily (as in the Great Lakes) they may significantly reduce the quantity of organic matter in the water column.  Organisms that use this energy source (such as microorganisms, filter-feeding insect larvae, and native mussels) may be outcompeted by the zebra mussels.  These impacts may be felt throughout the complex detritus-based food webs, possibly resulting in a decline of top-level consumers such as many species of sport fish and waterfowl.  Impacts on higher consumers may not be detectable for years as effects trickle upwards through the involved webs. \pard \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336  Determining and understanding such impacts will require monitoring of water quality and multiple trophic levels including vegetation, phytoplankton and zooplankton, macroinvertebrates, fish, mammals, and waterfowl.   \par 
Table 1.  Additional parameters to be monitored by a zebra mussel           monitoring program.\par 
\par 
Water Quality \par 
     depth                             ammonia          \par 
     temperature                       nitrates/nitrites             \par 
     water velocity                    calcium                       \par 
     dissolved oxygen                  chlorophyll                   \par 
     pH                                organic carbon   \par 
     total suspended solids                     \par 
     specific conductance\par 
     turbidity/transparency                                         \par 
                                             \par 
Biotic Populations\par 
     phytoplankton and zooplankton \par 
     macroinvertebrates - especially mussels    \par 
     fish                                 \par 
     vegetation\par 
     mammals\par 
     waterfowl\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\pard \sl480 \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 \tab We do not have all the baseline data or understanding necessary for future analysis to discern and interpret impacts of the zebra mussels on the UMRS.  For example, the dynamics (both temporal and spatial) of organic matter in large floodplain river ecosystems are not well documented or understood.  Therefore, it may be difficult to determine whether or not a perceived change in organic matter quantity and/or quality in the water column is part of a "natural cycle" or results from filter feeding activities of the zebra mussels.  Unfortunately, such gaps in our understanding of nutrient fluctuations, population dynamics, and their interactions are the rule rather than the exceptions.\par 
\tab The scope of a program to monitor zebra mussels and their impacts on large floodplain river systems of the Midwest may be defined by available personnel and funds.  The additional coverage necessary to monitor the distribution of zebra mussels should be provided by utilizing an informed public.  Additional, more intensive monitoring efforts to determine the conditions of zebra mussel populations (densities, reproduction, etc.) and to evaluate impacts should be geographically distributed to cover the different environments of the UMRS, with a minimum of three to four areas of intensive efforts (primary sites) on the Upper Mississippi River and two on the Illinois River.  At primary sites, data on adults, settled larvae and juveniles, and larvae in the water column should be collected weekly from spring through fall.  In addition to monitoring zebra mussels, data on water quality, vegetation, zooplankton and phytoplankton, macroinvertebrates, fish, waterfowl, and mammals should be collected (see Table 1).\par 
\tab The same agencies or individuals responsible for the primary monitoring sites should initiate and coordinate the sampling at several secondary sites, monitoring specifically for adults and settled larvae only.  The secondary sites should be interspersed with the primary sites and, once established, could be maintained by cooperating industries or volunteers.  Additional relevant data may be available for these secondary sites at little or no expense: for example, many industries perform physical and chemical analyses on the raw river water they use.\par 
\tab Methods and equipment used to monitor zebra mussel populations and their impacts should be standardized to facilitate valid comparisons.  A document such as Dr. Ellen Marsden's "Standard Protocols for Monitoring and Sampling Zebra Mussels" would provide a starting point.  It is also important that replicate samples be taken to provide for an assessment of variability.  \par 
\tab The data sets generated by the described monitoring program will be essential to documenting and understanding the impacts of zebra mussels on the ecology of the UMRS.  These data sets should be used to help create zebra mussel population models to aid in predicting future distributions and impacts, as well as to provide clues for designing and implementing management strategies.  Any zebra mussel monitoring program that is developed should take full advantage of the existing data collection efforts being undertaken on the UMRS.  This approach will reduce duplication of effort and should provide for the most efficient use of available funds, equipment, personnel, and expertise.\par 
\par 
\par 
\pard \qc \sl480 \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 LTRMP Zebra Mussel Monitoring \tab This past summer an existing program, the Long Term Resource Monitoring Program (LTRMP), was used to initiate baseline zebra mussel monitoring in eight reaches of the UMRS.  This zebra mussel monitoring was a cooperative effort of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service's Environmental Management Technical Center, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers' Waterways Experiment Station, the Illinois Natural History Survey, and the six LTRMP field stations (Figure 1).  The LTRMP field stations are responsible for monitoring water quality, vegetation, and fisheries on their particular river reaches.  With the exceptions of plankton, macroinvertebrates, mammals, and waterfowl, all the suggested additional parameters (Table 1) are currently monitored weekly or bimonthly along six separate river reaches of the UMRS by the LTRMP field stations.  \par 
\pard \sl480 \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 \tab Our baseline zebra mussel effort consisted of adding monitoring for adults and settled juveniles at each field station.  Limited sampling for larvae in the water column was done at the Havana Field Station.  Duplicate plate samplers (Figure 2) were deployed at two of the established LTRMP water quality monitoring sites near each field station and at two additional sites on the Illinois River (Figure 3).  Samplers near the field stations were inspected weekly by LTRMP water quality crews during their routine work; those at the two additional sites on the Illinois River were maintained by two private industries that use river water. \par 
\pard \qc \sl480 \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 \tab While we are still in the process of evaluating our efforts, I think our baseline program was successful.  The public awareness generated by our efforts resulted in our receiving reports and specimens of the first six zebra mussels collected in the Illinois River.  Juvenile zebra mussels were collected on our samplers maintained by LTV Steel at Hennepin, IL.  The samplers have been collected and preserved for further inspection in the laboratory to document possible occurrences of settled larvae and to examine periphyton communities that developed on the samplers.  Current Inland Distribution \tab Zebra mussel populations developing in southern Lake Michigan near Chicago,IL provided a probable source for recent expansion of the species into the UMRS.  Natural dispersal of larvae may have occurred with water diverted from Lake Michigan down the Illinois River via the Chicago River, the Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal, and the Des Plaines River (Figure 4) and into the Mississippi River just upstream from Alton.  Both settled larvae and adults may have been transported by recreational craft and commercial navigation vessels (barges) emanating from infested areas of southern Lake Michigan and traversing both the UMRS and the lower Mississippi River.  The other probable method of dispersal is trailered recreational boats that transport larvae and adults overland to both lotic and lentic habitats in the Mississippi River Basin.\par 
\pard \sl480 \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 \tab The first reported collection of a zebra mussel from the UMRS occurred on 19 April 1989.  The single,  quarter-inch specimen was collected in the Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal near Chicago, IL.  In July of 1990, a similar-sized zebra mussel was collected in the Calumet-Sag Channel.  The first documented specimen from the Illinois River was taken June 1991 in a side channel of the Illinois River near Bath, IL, approximately 217 river miles (350 km) downstream from Lake Michigan and 110 river miles (177 km) upstream from the confluence of the Illinois and Mississippi rivers.  That adult zebra mussel was attached to a native threeridge mussel (\i Amblema plicata\plain ) and was taken by a commercial sheller harvesting freshwater mussels for use in the cultured pearl industry.  Since then, adults and/or juveniles have been collected from at least seven other sites on the Illinois River (Figure 5).  In September, zebra mussels were reported from the Mississippi River as far upstream as Pool 8 near La Crosse, WI, and as far downstream as the Melvin Price Locks and Dam at Alton (Figure 5).\par 
\par 
\pard \qc \sl480 \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 Conclusion Rapidly, zebra mussels are becoming a permanent part of the UMRS ecosystem, and experiences from Europe and the Great Lakes indicate major impacts on the ecology and economy of the UMRS.  A coordinated research effort is needed to design and implement the most effective, efficient, and environmentally sound management programs to reduce negative ecological and economic impacts of zebra mussels.  A comprehensive monitoring program collecting data on zebra mussels and those abiotic and biotic factors which affect them as well as factors they affect will be an essential part of that research program.}