{\rtf0\ansi \deff0 {\fonttbl {\f0\froman Tms Rmn;}{\f1\fswiss Helv;}{\f2\fmodern Courier;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue127;\red0\green127\blue0;\red0\green127\blue127;\red127\green0\blue0;\red127\green0\blue127;\red127\green127\blue0;\red127\green127\blue127;\red63\green63\blue63;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red0\green255\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}\linex0 \sbknone 
\margl1440 \margr1296 \plain \gutter720 \margb1440 \margt1440 \margb6 \par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\pard \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab 23 August 1991\par 
\par 
\par 
Richard Wright\par 
LTRM POOL 26\par 
P.O. Box 368\par 
West Alton, MO  63386\par 
Dear Rick:\par 
\par 
\tab This letter confirms the discussion I had with you in the LTRM trailer at West Alton on 7 August. \par 
\par 
\tab I started by saying neither Bob Delaney nor I were satisfied with your performance as team leader, and that I expected your performance to improve within the next 30 days, at which time I would review your progress.  Because I will be out of town during the first two weeks of September, I now plan to complete your review on 16 September.\par 
\par 
\tab There are three possible outcomes of the review:  (1) Your performance is satisfactory and you may stay on as team leader.  (2) You must step down as team leader but you could seek one of the positions available at West Alton or Havana.  (3) I will ask you to leave our LTRM program altogether.\par 
\par 
\tab During our discussion, I listed the specific problems Robert Delaney and I have had with your performance, and I made suggestions for change.  According to Bob, you are not aggressive in planning and followup related to occupation of the soils lab or for the new wing or building.  He did not feel you were keeping him up-to-date.   Bob told me he had a hard time getting the number of square feet for the new building from you, and that Pam Theil and other EMTC staff had reported that you did not seem to be providing leadership for the field crews.  Bob felt so strongly about this that he told me EMTC should be involved in future selection of team leaders.  \par 
\par 
\tab You said that the building plans kept changing and that it was hard to keep up.  First there had simply been an addition to the soils lab, then it had become an entirely new building.  I said I expected you to stay on top of things.  You should have a file folder on top of your desk for each building alternative.  These files should be updated immediately when changes are made.  If Robert Delaney or I call, you should be able to pull the appropriate folder and describe the current status.  You must keep me, Robert Delaney, and Pat McGinnis informed of any changes or new information.\par 
\par 
\tab You should also involve your own staff in planning for the new building.  The latest version of the floor plan should be posted in the lunch room.  Invite suggestions from the staff; get them excited about the building also.\par 
\par 
\tab I made several suggestions on the floor plan:  (1) Check on requirements for separate men's and women's restrooms, handicapped facilities, etc.  (2)  A hallway between the office and heated garage might save wall space and serve as an airlock.  (3) I thought you might need a larger conference room.  (4) The garage stalls might be switched from one end of the building to the other, to give vehicles access without sharp turns.\par 
\par 
\tab I mentioned several other things that I thought you did not handle quickly enough:  (1) Ordering a bigger boat for safety reasons for the veg crew.  (2) Modem.  (3) Fax machine. \par 
\par 
\tab With regard to the boat, you told me that Doug said that there wasn't enough money for the boat, then Randy Burkhardt from EMTC said that they might be able to purchase a boat, but then later told you there was no money.  When I asked Doug about this, he said there was no \ul line item\plain  for the boat and that a transfer from salaries was necessary.  West Alton has excess salary money because of delays in hiring new staff.  Again, I think it was your responsibility to follow up and secure a line item transfer, and to keep in touch with Randy Burkhardt so that you could have taken action sooner.\par 
\par 
\tab Communication between EMTC and your station, between your station and us in Havana, and between you and Champaign is critical to efficient operation of these stations under Survey leadership.  I supplied your station with the modem specifically to assist this process.  The first time I needed to ship a file to Chuck Theiling, I found the modem wasn't ready--in fact it hadn't been hooked up for a month or more.\par 
\par 
\tab A fax machine is another important mode of communication.  We had been getting by using the fax machine in the Corps office in Riverlands.  I think you should have realized that it was not possible to send anything confidential, or anything mentioning the Corps, via this machine.  Also, when their machine went down and they did not repair it for weeks, you should have realized the situation had changed and that it was important for you to acquire your own fax machine.  The only alternative was unsatisfactory:  driving to Alton to an office products machine company, paying a premium for the fax service, and still not having confidentiality.  You mentioned that you had previously only received two faxes in two months, but I think that is largely because sensitive items could not be faxed to a Corps office or to the office products store in Alton.  Also, the morning Dave Philipp, Steve Kohler, and I were at your field station for a staff meeting, several faxes came in during the meeting, so I believe the fax machine has proven to be essential. \par 
\par 
\tab In another matter, you volunteered the information that Chuck Theiling thought you did not need a full-time office manager/secretary.  You indicated that you had wanted a part-time secretary, but the problem was created either by Doug or the main office in Champaign because when the appointment came through it was full-time.  I checked with Doug and he said he suggested an hourly appointment for maximum flexibility, but that you asked for more time than could be on an hourly appointment, so Brenda had to be appointed full- time.  Also, you had wanted to secure benefits for her, which she does not get on an hourly appointment.  I said if something wasn't right, it was your responsibility as team leader to see that it was changed, not Doug's responsibility.\par 
\par 
\tab You also volunteered that you still had not found a house between Alton and Springfield, so you were commuting 4-5 hours a day.  You and I both know that this makes it unlikely that you can stay late to deal with a crisis, or that you can have much after-hours social interaction with visitors or employees.  While social interaction is not a written requirement in your job description, it is something most supervisory personnel at the position of team leader and above do.\par 
\par 
\tab I must be frank with you and say that your progress since 7 August does not bode well for your 16 September evaluation.  Although you finally did purchase a fax machine, I do not think you handled this in the best way.  I asked my secretary, Cammy, to obtain the latest price information and sources of supply for our Sharp fax which has been trouble free and reliable.  She sent the information to you or Brenda.  These machines are now available from the vendor for approximately half of what we paid for ours (the sale price was $549.00 with one year servicing included).  When I visited the Pool 26 station on 6-7 August, I found that you had purchased a Sears machine costing $80.00 more, because you felt that the paper work was too complicated and would take too long.  Actually, you could have used your own Departmental Purchase Order (DPO), or one of ours, called the vendor and had the fax delivered via UPS within a few days.  I expected you to at least consider our suggestion and if you made a different choice, to have some good reason for doing so.  You have been working for us since January and Brenda has been to a training session with Stephanie, so I expect you to know how to order equipment by now.  If you do not know how to get something done quickly, you could certainly call Stephanie or Doug.\par 
\par 
\tab A second problem concerns your memo about the new building to Pat McGinnis, with copies to me, Dave Philipp, and Robert Delaney.  I received adverse comments back on either the substance or the form of your memo or both from Dave Philipp and Robert Delaney.  I have also marked up the copy that you sent me (enclosed). The memo has the form of both a memo and a letter, it assumes an excessively confrontational or dogmatic tone with Pat McGinnis, and it is full of grammatical errors.  You should at least learn how to spell the name of the Director of the Center for Aquatic Ecology.  In the future, I want to review all of your correspondence with outside agencies before you mail them.  I expect you, Chuck Theiling, and the rest of your staff to run your documents through a spell checker and Correct Grammar on the IBM or an equivalent. (I sent information on grammar checkers for the Mac to Chuck.)  The text then should be converted to Wordstar files and modemed to me, if I am available, or to Doug if I am not.  I do not expect to have to continue to correct grammatical errors or to teach a team leader how to write a business letter or memo.  At the very least, Brenda should have known how to type a business memo, and it seems inefficient to me if you are typing your own correspondence, unless it is so sensitive a matter that Brenda should not see it.  \par 
\par 
\tab You still are not keeping me and Dave Philipp apprised of events that could impact our operations on Pool 26.  News about the ouster of Colonel Corbin came from Dave Philipp via me to you, instead of the other way around.  You should be keeping us up-to-date on the exact nature of the alleged irregularities and whether these will have any impact on Pat McGinnis or the Riverlands Environmental Demonstration Area.  Surely there have been some articles in the St. Louis newspapers.\par 
\par 
\tab I will be in Rock Island at a meeting of the LTRM analysis team 27-28 August and in Minnesota from 31 August until 13 September.  Please call me at work or at home if you have any questions about this letter, my interpretation of these events, or the upcoming review on 16 September.  I anticipate that you might want to know how I will use the staff assessments of you.  The answer is that they will count, but that they will not form the whole basis of my evaluation.  If you have any questions about the procedure or my assessment that you do not wish to discuss with me, Dave Philipp or Jacque Sanders would be the appropriate people to approach.\par 
\par 
\tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab Sincerely,\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab Richard E. Sparks, Director\par 
\tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab River Research Laboratory of \par 
\tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab \tab the Forbes Biological Station\par 
\par 
RES:css\par 
\par 
Enclosures:  Marked-up memo     \par 
\par 
cc:  Dave Philipp\par 
     Doug Blodgett\par 
     Jacque Sanders\par 
\par 
}