{\rtf0\ansi \deff0 {\fonttbl {\f0\froman Tms Rmn;}{\f1\fswiss Helv;}{\f2\fmodern Courier;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue127;\red0\green127\blue0;\red0\green127\blue127;\red127\green0\blue0;\red127\green0\blue127;\red127\green127\blue0;\red127\green127\blue127;\red63\green63\blue63;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red0\green255\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}\linex0 \sbknone 
\margl1440 \margr1296 \plain \gutter720 \margb1440 \margt1440 \margb6 \par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\pard \qc \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 M E M O R A N D U M\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\pard \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336   to:  LTRMP Zebra Mussel Monitoring Cooperators\par 
\par 
from:  Doug Blodgett\par 
\par 
date:  26 September 1991\par 
\par 
  re:  Completion of 1991 zebra mussel monitoring\par 
\par 
\par 
We will quit monitoring for settled zebra mussel larvae when the water temperature at the samplers drops to/below 12\up6 o C (54o Fahrenheit).  That is near the temperature they reportedly cease gamete production, so additional settled larvae would be unexpected.  At that time, simply remove the glass slides but do not replace them with fresh ones.  \par 
\plain \par 
Carefully inspect the pvc sampler for adults, but we do not want you to collect the samplers yet.  Instead, replace the pvc sampler until you receive final instructions and shipping supplies.  The biotic communities that have developed on the plates will be analyzed by Dr. Andrew Miller and some of his colleagues at the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Waterways Experiment Station, Vicksburg, MS, and we do not want them to dry out.  We plan to have you disassemble the units in the field with each plate being individually bagged in double ziplock bags with sugar/buffered formalin solution.  These bags will then be sealed in plastic buckets for shipping.  I am in the process of ordering the necessary supplies and will ship them to you as soon as I get them.    Again, until you receive the shipping supplies and instructions, leave the pvc samplers in place in the water.\par 
\par 
If you have comments or questions, feel free to call me.  Your cooperation and efforts are appreciated.}