{\rtf0\ansi \deff0 {\fonttbl {\f0\froman Tms Rmn;}{\f1\fswiss Helv;}{\f2\fmodern Courier;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue127;\red0\green127\blue0;\red0\green127\blue127;\red127\green0\blue0;\red127\green0\blue127;\red127\green127\blue0;\red127\green127\blue127;\red63\green63\blue63;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red0\green255\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}\linex0 \sbknone 
\margl1440 \margr1296 \plain \gutter720 \margb1440 \margt1440 \margb6 \par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\b \pard \qj \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 K. Douglas Blodgett\plain \up6 1, \b Pamella A. Thiel\plain \up6 2, \b Andrew C. Miller\plain \up6 3, and \b Richard E. Sparks\plain \up6 1\par 
\plain \par 
\par 
\par 
\up6 1  Illinois Natural History Survey and Long Term Resource Monitoring Program, LTRMP Field Station, P.O. Box 546, Havana, IL 62644.\par 
\plain \par 
\up6 2  U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Environmental Management Technical Center, 575 Lester Avenue, Onalaska, WI 54650.\par 
\plain \par 
\up6 3  U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Waterways Experiment Station, WESER-A, Vicksburg, MS 39180-0631.\par 
\plain \par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\pard \qj \sl360 \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 Zebra Mussel Invasion of the Upper Mississippi River System\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\pard \qj \sl288 \tx576 \tx1296 \tx2016 \tx2736 \tx3456 \tx4176 \tx4896 \tx5616 \tx6336 \tab The rapid range expansion of the recently introduced zebra mussel (\i Dreissena polymorpha\plain ) forewarns of significant negative impacts on both the biology and economy of the Upper Mississippi River System (UMRS) -- a resource the United States Congress has declared to be nationally significant both as an ecosystem and a commercial navigation corridor.\par 
\tab Zebra mussel populations developing in southern Lake Michigan provide a probable source for recent expansion of the species into the UMRS.  Natural dispersal of larvae may occur with water diverted from Lake Michigan down the Illinois River (via the Chicago River, the Chicago Sanitary and Ship Canal, and the Des Plaines River) and into the Mississippi River.  Both settled larvae and adults may be transported by recreational craft and commercial navigation vessels (barges) emanating from infested areas of southern Lake Michigan and traversing both the UMRS and the lower Mississippi River.  Another possible means of dispersal is trailered recreational boats that transport larvae and adults overland to both lotic and lentic habitats in the Mississippi River Basin. \par 
\par 
\tab The first confirmed collection of a zebra mussel from the UMRS occurred on 18 June 1991 in a side channel of the Illinois River near Bath, IL, approximately 217 river miles (350 km) downstream from Lake Michigan and 110 river miles (177 km) upstream from the confluence of the Illinois and Mississippi rivers.  The adult specimen was attached to a native threeridge mussel (\i Amblema plicata\plain ) and was taken by a commercial sheller.  Additional adult specimens have been collected from the Illinois River by shellers and others, and settled larvae are reported as far as 118 river miles (190 km) downstream from Lake Michigan.  In September, adults were reported from the Mississippi River as far upstream as Pool 8 near La Crosse, WI, and as far downstream as the Melvin Price Locks and Dam at Alton, IL.  \par 
\tab Negative biological impacts may result from the zebra mussel's competition for resources, especially food and space.  These biological impacts may also manifest themselves economically by affecting commercial and recreational fishing and the harvest of native mussel shells for use in the cultured pearl industry.  Other negative economic impacts may include mechanical interference at locks and dams, clogging of municipal and industrial water intakes and systems, and damage to engine cooling systems of recreational and commercial vessels as well as decreased fuel efficiencies due to increased drag. \tab In conjunction with six Long Term Resource Monitoring Program field stations on the UMRS, we have initiated a baseline monitoring effort for zebra mussels.  Our major monitoring and research objectives are to  1) document the temporal and spatial  distributions of zebra mussels in the UMRS;  2) understand their life history in midwestern, floodplain rivers; and  3) ascertain and interpret any shifts in community structure of native biota (plankton, macroinvertebrates, and fishes) resulting from the physical and biological alterations the invader may cause.  A thorough understanding of zebra mussels and their impacts will provide information to facilitate the development of environmentally sound control strategies.}