{\rtf0\ansi \deff0 {\fonttbl {\f0\froman Tms Rmn;}{\f1\fswiss Helv;}{\f2\fmodern Courier;}}{\colortbl;\red0\green0\blue0;\red0\green0\blue127;\red0\green127\blue0;\red0\green127\blue127;\red127\green0\blue0;\red127\green0\blue127;\red127\green127\blue0;\red127\green127\blue127;\red63\green63\blue63;\red0\green0\blue255;\red0\green255\blue0;\red0\green255\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;\red255\green0\blue255;\red255\green255\blue0;\red255\green255\blue255;}\linex0 \sbknone 
\margl1440 \margr1296 \plain \gutter720 \margb1440 \margt1440 \margb6 \par 
\par 
\par 
\pard         \par 
        \par 
        \par 
        \par 
        Zebra Mussel Invasion of the Upper Mississippi River System\par 
        \par 
        \par 
        K. Douglas Blodgett1, Richard E. Sparks1, Pamella A. Thiel2, \par 
        \par 
        and Andrew C. Miller3\par 
        \par 
        \par 
        1  Illinois Natural History Survey and Long Term Resource \par 
        Monitoring Program, LTRMP Field Station, P.O. Box 546, \par 
        Havana, IL 62644.\par 
        \par 
        2  U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Environmental Management \par 
        Technical Center, 575 Lester Avenue, Onalaska, WI 54650.\par 
        \par 
        3  U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Waterways Experiment \par 
        Station, WESER-A, Vicksburg, MS 39180-0631.\par 
        \par 
        \par 
        \par 
        AV Needs: Carousel Projector\par 
        \par 
        \par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
\par 
        \par 
        \par 
             The rapid range expansion of the recently introduced zebra mussel \par 
        (Dreissena polymorpha) forewarns of significant negative impacts on both the \par 
        ecology and economy of the Upper Mississippi River System (UMRS) -- a resource \par 
        the United States Congress has declared to be nationally significant both as \par 
        an ecosystem and a commercial navigation corridor.\par 
             The first confirmed collection of a zebra mussel from the UMRS occurred \par 
        on 18 June 1991 in a side channel of the Illinois River near Bath, IL, \par 
        approximately 217 river miles (350 km) downstream from Lake Michigan and 110 \par 
        river miles (177 km) upstream from the confluence of the Illinois and \par 
        Mississippi rivers.  The adult specimen was attached to a native threeridge \par 
        mussel (Amblema plicata) and was taken by a commercial sheller harvesting \par 
        freshwater mussels for use in the cultured pearl industry.  Since then, adults \par 
        and/or juveniles have been collected from at least seven other sites on the \par 
        Illinois River.  In September, zebra mussels were reported from the \par 
        Mississippi River as far upstream as Pool 8 near La Crosse, WI, and as far \par 
        downstream as the Melvin Price Locks and Dam at Alton, IL.  \par 
             Zebra mussels are remarkably prolific: populations of up to 45 thousand \par 
        individuals/m2 developed within a few years after introduction into Lake Erie, \par 
        and densities up to 1 million/m2 may be present in power plants.  They are \par 
        filter feeders and remove organic detritus and plankton from the water; in \par 
        Lake Erie, adults filter approximately one liter of water daily.  Given their \par 
        potential numbers and filtering rates, zebra mussels could severely impact the \par 
        large floodplain river ecosystem by affecting the base of important detritus-\par 
        based food webs.   \par 
             In our alluvial rivers, native freshwater mussels often provide the only \par 
        natural, firm substrate available to macroinvertebrates for stable sites of \par 
        attachment for eggs, pupae, feeding nets, etc.  These native mussels and their \par 
        host communities provide habitat and food for small fish which are in turn \par 
        prey for larger fish.  Such "mussel bed ecosystems" may be disrupted if dense \par 
        encrustations of zebra mussels kill native mussels by overgrowing their shells \par 
        and mechanically interfering with siphoning or outcompeting them for food.\par 
             Biological impacts may also manifest themselves economically by \par 
        affecting commercial and recreational fishing and the harvest of native mussel \par 
        shells for the cultured pearl industry.  Other negative economic impacts may \par 
        result from mechanical interference at locks and dams, clogging of municipal \par 
        and industrial water intakes and systems, and damage to engine cooling systems \par 
        of recreational and commercial vessels as well as decreased fuel efficiencies \par 
        due to increased drag.\par 
             In conjunction with six Long Term Resource Monitoring Program field \par 
        stations on the UMRS, we have initiated a baseline monitoring effort for zebra \par 
        mussels.  Our major monitoring and research objectives are to:  1) document \par 
        the temporal and spatial distributions of zebra mussels in the UMRS;  2) \par 
        understand their life history in midwestern, large floodplain rivers; and  3) \par 
        ascertain and interpret any shifts in community structure of native biota \par 
        (plankton, macroinvertebrates, and fishes) resulting from the physical and \par 
        biological alterations the invader may cause.  A thorough understanding of \par 
        zebra mussels and their impacts will facilitate the development of \par 
        environmentally sound management strategies.\par 
\par 
\par 
}